# Biochar impacts on soil moisture retention and respiration in a coarse-textured soil under dry conditions
- Thao et al., 2024
- University of California - Merced (+ ARS)
- SSSAJ - Fundamental Soil Science

## My Connections
- Farm I visited in California has cut their water usage from 40" to less than 20" by amending with almond husk biochar - It was in Merced county too!
- They said that reduction in water usage was the only reason they had not gone out of business. They are not in an irrigation district, and pumping has graduated rates (first 5" free; $500/in after 40" etc)
# Introduction
- Problem: Water scarcity is bad for crop production. This is especially true in draught-prone Central Valley, where we grow a lot of our produce. 
- Hypothesis: Soils amended with locally produced biochar will have a positive influence on soil biological activity compared to unamended soil. 
- Objectives: 
	1. Assess water retention potentials of locally produced biochar using film sorption.
	2. Model the influence of biochar amendment on moisture retention in coarse-textured soils.
	3. Evaluate effects on soil respiration under different moisture regimes.

# Methods
- Study Design
	1. Control + 7 biochars (different feedstocks)
	2. 2 application rates (5% & 10%)
	3. 3 replicates of each
- Measurements:
	- Moisture Retention
	- Hydrophobicity
	- Respiration
# Results
- Water Retention:
	- Biochar amendments increased water retention, especially above permanent the wilting point
	- Almond Shell biochar performed the best
	- New finding: pore space characteristics were the main feature that improved water availability, not specific surface area
- Hydrophobicity:
	- Hydrophobicity was found to not be a main factor in this study
- Soil Respiration:
	- Walnut and Almond shells increased respiration, and Almond Shells dramatically so

# Conclusions
- Importance of selecting the right biochar feedstock
- Biochar can lessen the effects of drought. 
- Locally produced (cheap) biochar using small-scale pyrolysis (also cheap) could improve soil water availability in Central California